title: Design the Perfect Email: Bonus Tips

----

date: 2008-03-05 08:00

----

text: 

Some quick bonus tips on designing the perfect email.

ALWAYS TEST on every major email client and web browser (for online versions) for links, copy, spelling, design, personalization, and SPAM score.
Consider using short, teaser copy for each main article. The Cliffhanger-Effect (or Zeigarnik-Effect) shows that consumers feel the need to answer unanswered questions, articles or problems, and that they’re more likely to click-through to an article when prompted with an opener only.
Segment your data. The more segmented your data, the more personalized it becomes. Metrics will increase noticeably as recipients respond to relevance to them and their needs.
Never send similar content emails to same recipients within 2 weeks of each other. Otherwise you risk large unsub rates or worse (ISP complaints).
If sending similar content to same recipients as part of a touch/conversion process, ensure your content is clear, and obvious that it is Step X of a X step process.
While text links for calls-to-action help with SPAM filters, large clickable image buttons get higher clicks.
Try to place your average recipient into 2 main groups: B-to-B (business to business) and B-to-C (business to consumer).
B-to-B: These users primarily use desktop-based email clients administered by a dedicated IT group, which includes spam filter rules. Common B-to-B email clients include Outlook and Lotus Notes. It is worth noting that Outlook should be divided into 2 sub-groups: Pre-Outlook 2007 and Post-Outlook 2007.
General rule-of-thumb: Table-based mark-up using inline CSS.
B-to-C: These users are a mixed bag, using both desktop-based email clients that include Thunderbird and Eudora, as well as web-based email clients including Yahoo, Hotmail/Live, Gmail, and .Mac.
General rule-of-thumb: Either CSS or table-based mark-up, with diligent testing.

----

tags: email design, Email Marketing, tips &amp; tricks

----

categories: email design,Email Marketing,quick tips